As 2023 draws to a close, there was one particular event which - despite being featured on the front news of every media outlet in the world - definitely did not receive the attention it deserves.

As you already know, on December 18th, the Vatican released a declaration of tremendous importance for the Catholic religion - *Fiducia supplicans* - in which they reversed their stance on gay marriage.

Most people do not understand the meaning of this declaration.

I will start by reminding you that the Christian faith appeared about 2000 years ago. In the beginning, it was mostly illegal and Christians were persecuted by the Romans. Then everything changed in 313 AD when the Western Roman Emperor Constantine I agreed to legally recognize it with the Edict of Milan - mirroring the decision of the Eastern Emperor Licinius from the Balkans and his Edict of Serdica from 311 AD. This date is one of the most important dates in Christianity. Early Christianity was very tightly related to Judaism with which it shared most of its written texts - however shortly after being recognized, in 325 AD, during the First Ecumenical Council of Nicaea, it received its first official written canon law. The texts written by the early Apostles - of which by this time there were some variations - were recognized. In 331 AD, all of those texts were finally officially compiled in single book - and what we currently call the Bible was born.

Although there were various minor revisions of these texts - and the Christian canon law - during the centuries - little did change after this time. There were six more Ecumenical Councils - for a total of seven - during the next 400 years. Each of one those declared more and more of the early Christian sects - of which there were many - heretical. In traditional Rabbinic Judaism, mysticism was normally allowed only for ordained priests. As early Christianity lacked any organized priesthood, this spurred a huge number of smaller number of sects with their own teachings. The goal of the newly founded organized Christian Church was to unify this new religion. They they gradually transformed it into the very dogmatic, strict religion that came to be the defining characteristic of the feudal system in Europe. This new form of Christianity was highly disciplinary on the Foucault scale. They dramatically scaled down on the mysticism which did not come back until the Renaissance. In this form of Christianity, life on Earth was only a preparation for the after-life.

During those Councils, a growing rift - caused by tensions between the Western and the Eastern Roman Empires - led to the Eight Ecumenical Council - the Fourth Council of Constantinople in 869 AD - being not recognized by the Eastern Roman Empire - which in turn led to the split between what came to be called the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church. The split - along the preexisting tension lines - was entirely political and was caused by the inability to elect a single Patriarch of Constantinople - from this point on there were going to be two Patriarchs.

The next major turmoil in the Christian faith did not happen until 1517 AD. A Catholic priest, named Martin Luther, published a treatise called the Ninety-five Theses, that ended being so divisive, that it led to 150 years of religious wars throughout Europe that finally ended with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. Some fighting continued, mostly in France, until the early 18th century. The fighting erupted over the total refusal of the Catholic Church to reform some of its doctrines. Thus, the Protestant and the Reformed denominations were born. Some people were so fed up with the Catholic Church that they left to settle in new colonies in the newly discovered Americas. The Reformation introduced a new, much more materialistic world-view - one in which life on Earth played a central role and was key to the Industrial Revolution that followed in Europe and North America.

This should put the *Fiducia supplicans* into perspective. This is how often the Catholic Church decides on a major reversal of its policies.

This is the proof that we live in a time of great social change, a time that will be remembered thousands of years later as turning point in our history.

Because the policy on marriage is one that predates the Christian faith itself. Traditional marriage is an institution that predates writing.

This decision - which is absolutely tremendous and it is about much more than simply gay marriage - marks the end of a chapter of development of the human civilization. A chapter of development which covers its first 10,000 years.

As we shed one of our last bonds to our animal past - our means of reproduction - human civilization is slowly evolving into a mature technological civilization. I am deeply convinced that the future generations will draw the line between the primal civilization of the past and the new mature civilization of the future along these lines.

Today, it is considered utterly barbaric for a woman to give birth by herself - even if she is naturally fully capable of it. As our current medical technology progresses, during the coming centuries, natural birth itself will come to be seen as barbaric. Artificial insemination and artificial wombs will surpass their natural counterparts. They will offer even higher chances of survival and they will produce healthier individuals. The natural family that we inherited from our animal past will be no more.

And, without any doubt, this will change society in a completely radical manner that we cannot yet fully comprehend.
