# Does God still exist in the 21th century?

The concept of deity is as old as the human race. It is still matter of debate when exactly homo sapiens became a sentient species - and which behavioral change most the most critical one. The more we know about about our first ancestors, the more it becomes clear that the process was very gradual and there weren't any qualitative changes - only quantitative ones. Yet, there are two very important behavioral elements that defined early humans - the ceremonial burial of the dead and the appearance of the first signs of art. Both of these do not enhance survival in any way and were not born out of necessity. These were the very first signs of civilization and culture. Even if the latest studies of chimpanzees show some very primitive rituals when dealing with the dead, this only reinforces the view that our evolution was very gradual and that there wasn't a single defining moment in time when it happened.

The realization of one's own mortality is the first step towards religion and the concept of God. The human is mortal while God is immortal. It was this concept of God what really set us apart from our animal ancestors. It was our very first example of abstract thinking. How comes that this concept has fallen out of fashion in our modern world? Has God become obsolete?

Even if our average lifespan has considerably increased, we are still exactly as mortal as the very first humans were. This means that if we are not looking for God anymore, there must be another reason.

First of all, the concept of God has changed dramatically over different periods in history, different cultures and the different religions that tried to define it. From the very first deities of the primitive men, through the ancient Greek gods, to the single ultimate God as defined by the monotheistic religions that came to dominate most of the world. Each era came with its own beliefs and expectations of God. Each era came with its own explanations, myths and legends. And each era came with its own values systems. The values systems is probably the most important thing to come out of religion. A values systems is one of the most fundamental properties of a society and as it defines its structure. Besides the values system, another traditional tenant of religion was cosmology. Every single of the old religions came with its own views, myths and legends about cosmology. For most our short human history, cosmology had always a major subject of fascination, yet one about which we had very few actual clues.

Even if it remains difficult to pinpoint to exact moment in time when our animal ancestors transitioned to being a sentient species, the moment of time when our society reached maturity and became truly self-aware is, without any doubt, the early 20th century. The early 20th century was a time of dramatic change. Until that moment, most of the humanity led a somewhat primitive lifestyle. For most people, little had changed since the agricultural revolution. Then suddenly, in less than 50 years, subsistence farming was replaced by a truly industrial society which required very different skill sets. New theories in physics swept the foundations of philosophy by redefining matter, space and time. The theory of evolution gave finally gave us the answer to what has been one of the ultimate questions in every religion - who were we, where we were coming from and why we existed. We finally understood the nature of the stars and the planets that we had observed with awe since we started walking, event that had completely transformed our views on cosmology. Thanks to a new completely new science, psychology, we gained an unprecedented insight about what made us tick - on the conscious and the unconscious level. New, radical ideas in philosophy, rejected traditional religious thinking and culminated with Nietzche killing God - a symbolic act of great importance which marked the beginning of the new era of religious thinking. Then came game theory - which I always considered the pinnacle of this new knowledge - and linked together evolution, psychology and mathematics in a single unified theory. The Bible was now obsolete.

I still vividly remember my first contact with game theory during my last year as an university student. I even remember my university professor making a joke about the philosophical implications of the reiterated prisoner's dilemma. I still consider this moment to be one of the most defining moments in my life. Today, 20 years later - and more than 80 years since it was first formulated - I am still amazed that this theory - and its huge philosophical implications - remain virtually unknown outside of the mathematically-inclined scientific community.

In fact, unless you hold a degree in one of those scientific fields, you will probably need to be reminded that all natural selection can be modelled by game theory. It is also found at the base of the most fundamental science about human behavior - evolutionary psychology - which studies most of all basic instincts.

As it is very often the case with empirical human knowledge amassed over millennia, it is absolutely striking how much of this the Bible got completely right. In fact, by rendering it obsolete, game theory finally validated mostly everything in it that dealt with human nature. Even the battle of Armageddon can be expressed by game theory. Most of its cosmology however, has become completely obsolete - as this is something our ancestors could not have predicted in any meaningful way.

Traditionally, religion has always filled the void left by hard science. In between them, we have philosophy which deals with logic and truth. As our scientific knowledge has dramatically increased over the last century, the old classical religions have ran aground. 

But one cannot miss the fact that the central concept of God, our creator, is more valid than ever. And for the first time ever, it has a clearly defined form and for first time it even obeys the laws of nature as we understand them - namely game theory and evolution. Should we know where to look, God is in fact more real than ever:

*And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.* Genesis 1:28

As this is who we are - the children of our Creator, Evolution and Game Theory, whose purpose is to survive and populate the Universe.
