# Lucifer vs Prometheus

Many people in my venue of work - engineers and scientists - tend to consider the Middle Ages as times of scientific obscurantism - or even regress - compared to the enlightenment of the Classical Antiquity. They also tend to place the blame for this entirely on the Catholic Church. This is a very common misconception that is not shared at all by most people in the social sciences who are experts of this period.

While it is true that Classical Antiquity valued science and technology more than the next era, it was also a period that based on slavery. Free men did not have the obligation to work at all and most of them tried excelling in various fields - for prestige rather then profit - such as philosophy, literature, mathematics, natural sciences and the fine arts. While it is true that they left behind a great deal of extraordinary achievements, their pursuits were not dictated by any real direct needs, and their society - based on slavery - was never sustainable.

The transition from Antiquity to the Medieval Era in Europe is considered very significant - and it is also the moment at time when the old religions, which were later called Paganist, were replaced by the much stricter monotheistic - or Abrahamic religions. These new religions brought a new more progressive social order - the feudalism - in which the common folk were still not completely free - but were no longer considered livestock. Money and commerce slowly started playing more and more important role. By the time Islam - the last and the most modern one of the major monotheist religions - appeared, money and commerce were already considered important enough to be regulated by the religion itself. Money brought efficiency and this was a major driver of technological progress.

Contrary to the popular belief that these new religions tried suppressing scientific knowledge - they in fact tried to promote it. Christianity was the first religion which eliminated the initiation rituals - some of which were still present in its predecessor - Judaism - and made the entire corpus of religious knowledge open to everyone who was able to read. Most of the works of the ancient Greek and Roman philosophers survived to our day thanks to the tireless copying by generations of Christian monks who made a very significant effort to preserve them. Most of the early scientists of the Enlightenment era were sponsored by the Church.

Yet, those new religions did promote obedience and did in fact encourage some obscurantism in the common folk. They placed severe restrictions on the distribution of science that was contrary to the established Christian doctrines - the heliocentric model of the solar system being probably the most famous example. It was the necessity of the times - with the newly found freedom, the common folk had also to learn newly needed responsibilities. Both Christianity and Islam entrusted the new feudal rulers with divine rights and helped to shape and maintain the first states. The endless pursuit of knowledge was something that was simply not expected from the average peasant.

Nowhere else this change of values is as evident as in the stories of Lucifer and Prometheus.

The story of Prometheus is one of the most important moral stories of Antiquity. Prometheus dared to challenge the gods in order to steal from them the secret of fire. He was severely punished for his transgression, yet his deed did have the desired effect. He incarnates the ultimate moral superiority.

Lucifer, whose name can be traced back through Medieval French to the Latin *Lux Ferre* - *The Light Bearer* - was an angel whose pride led him to challenge God. He was severely punished and was exiled to hell where he became a demon. In Christian mythology, he came to symbolize the ultimate evil.

These two stories are essentially the same - even if it is a matter of debate if the Christian version was directly inspired from the Greek one. It comes to us as a translation of an earlier Roman myth.

They perfectly illustrate the change in the values systems between the Antiquity and the Medieval Era. As the Medieval era slowly came to an end - once again at the same time as some great changes in religious thinking - there was a new shift in social values. There was Martin Luther who was the first to openly challenge the temporal power of the Church - a notion so archaic today that most people do not know its meaning - then there were a series of philosophers, the most important of which I consider to be Thomas Paine with *"Age of Reason"* who greatly contributed to this new world view. It was a time of great changes - the French Revolution and the American Independence War successfully challenged the old political systems of the Christian world. Yet Christianity itself was such a successful religion that it survived, even if somewhat fragmented and partially reformed. Only in the US, far away from the Catholic Church, there were some true attempts at creating a radically different form of Christianity - some of which survive to this day as a somewhat grotesque sects. These are probably the last true examples of a living Christian religion. On the other side, the Catholic Church in Europe slowly devolved into a symbolic institution. Both Christianity and Islam were so incredibly successful, that they simply carried over in the next era despite having lost most of its meaning.

If we go back to the stories of Prometheus and Lucifer we cannot fail to remark that the values of Prometheus are much closer to what is expected from the modern man. The very powerful symbol of a man carrying a lit torch reappeared during the 20th century. It was the central ritual of the newly restored Olympic Games of the ancient world. It was also a symbol which was very well understood and widely used by both Fascism and Communism - which can be considered to be early catastrophically failed attempts at creating a truly novel religion for the modern world. Both of them used extensively this symbol for the new cult of technology and science that was its most defining feature. Both of them made the Olympic Games a central part of their display of moral superiority to the rest of the world. Yet, it seems that the moral lesson of the original Greek story was somehow lost on them.

Both Lucifer and Prometheus were severely punished - this element is the only common part in both stories. Playing God is always a losing game - and this is something that both Fascism and Communism failed to really incorporate into their doctrines. 

One has to recognize that God has changed a lot since Jesus and Muhammad - as our new God reflects our new scientific and technological knowledge. As we have come to understand Evolution and Game Theory - he have in a way become gods ourselves. **Our new God is neither perfect neither omnipotent**. Yet challenging God still carries the same consequences as it always did - because we are still mortal and limited in our knowledge - while God is still immortal and infinite.
