# The Ballad of Ron Hubbard

Today, most of you think of Scientology as some weird cross between a death cult and a multi-level marketing scam. However this wasn't always the case.

In fact, the story of Scientology is one that has such a great moral lesson int it, that it should probably become a future holy collection of myths and legends.

Scientology was one of the many so-called *"New Age"* faiths to come out of the spiritual revival that accompanied the sexual revolution of the 1960s. It was the only that actually gave rise to a fully coherent and complete religion - and most of it happened because of one man - its truly remarkable founder Ron Hubbard.

The sexual revolution was the final nail in the coffin of Christianity in the Western World - from this moment on, one had to choose between being a normal conforming to society person and being a devout Christian. It was no longer possible to be both. Christian faith had become completely detached from the modern man. Various radically unorthodox beliefs started filling this new void. As the unconscious usually does not change once the character of a person is developed - which means that radical change of the human psyche requires many generations - people were still expecting that salvation had to somehow come from the sky. Most of the new faiths that came out of this Age of Aquarius did incorporate in some way another new aspect of the human civilization that had appeared at the same moment - space exploration. Science fiction had became mainstream. And the centuries old practice of confessing your sins to your pastor was being slowly replaced by the new emerging science of psychoanalysis which was gaining traction.

Ron Hubbard was a very talented man with a perfect understanding of both - he was an acclaimed science fiction writer with hands-on psychiatry experience. He had extraordinary story-telling skills and he was a master psychiatrist with unorthodox views. His self-improvement methods were simple, easy to understand and definitely not without merit. They came at the absolutely right time on a market that was ready for them. He brilliantly packaged his product with fascinating science fiction and it wasn't long before he realized that he had in fact created a new religion. He gradually went from teaching to preaching - fully understanding what he was doing. His teachings were not empty and he was able to come up with real theological doctrines - he was brilliant at borrowing ideas from existing faiths - including the still largely unknown in the Western World Eastern religions and also early first century Gnosticism. And he was not afraid to radically change whatever he decided.

His success was absolutely tremendous. At its height, the newly founded Church of Scientology had millions of followers. Hubbard himself was venerated as a God-like figure. They say that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely, but the truth is that few people in human history have ever experienced first-hand the power that Hubbard had over his followers. The definition of a totalitarian society is that a totalitarian dictatorship has power and right to regulation over the private life of its subjects - while a normal dictatorship is usually limited to the public and professional life. But every normal dictator's power stops at the doorstep of people's homes. Except for Ron Hubbard - who was probably the very first human since the time of Egyptian Pharaohs to wield power over literally every aspect of the life of his subjects.

Today many erroneously believe that his sin was greed - when in fact it was clearly the worst of them all - it was vanity. Creating a major religion takes much longer than a single lifetime - and Ron Hubbard was in a hurry. He turned to money as a means to greatly speed up the adoption of his teachings and started managing Scientology as a business. Alas, he turned to be also really good at business. Not that making money out of your followers is a very difficult task, once they believe that you are a God. It remains a mystery how a man like him could forget that faith was probably even higher than love on the list of things money cannot buy.

The subject of money for the Church is always a very delicate one in every religion. Usually, new religions start with an absolute ban on priests making any money out of their subjects - and once they start approaching their inevitable end - they start their decline because of the unrestrained decadence of their organized priesthood. Major stable religions take many centuries to go through this transformation. Scientology did it in less than two decades.

During the height of its temporal power - because this term actually means something when applied to Scientology - Ron Hubbard - as well as all of its high priests - were cruising on a large ship in international waters to avoid being subject to any judicial control. The deadly mix of a successful religion, money and unlimited power without judicial oversight reached a boiling point in only a few years. A society out of a dystopian science fiction movie emerged on this ship. Everyone was watching over everyone, byzantines schemes for power were being fueled by accusations of heresy, and various punishments - most of them tantamount to torture were being handed randomly - with some ideas that seemed to have been directly borrowed from the Nazi concentration camps. Hubbard himself was spending his days in permanent meditation - trying to come up more holy legends to add to his sacred texts - while a number of bikini-clad young girls catered to his daily needs. He even disposed of his own secret services - fanatical followers who often engaged in outrageously criminal behavior against his enemies. A number of people in the completely opaque from the outside inner circle of Scientology died under suspicious circumstances.

Finally, as the first wave of a second generation Scientologists started coming out of age, the old and ailing Hubbard was slowly replaced by his successor. He managed to seize the power in an absolutely classical way - as it was very common in the ancient imperial courts - by establishing a total control on the information coming in and out of him and slowly eliminating all potential rivals.

Needlessly to say, as the power - and wealth - of the Church continued to grow - the number of adherents started to decline. Up to this day, the Church still has a very dedicated following consisting of a several tens of thousands core members. While its numbers are obviously shrinking world-wide, it still enjoys a very good foothold in Hollywood - where it has traditionally been very strong. But without any clear direction - and being managed entirely as a business - its days are surely numbered.

# A Theological Analysis of Scientology

Scientology is truly remarkable because it is the very first focused attempt at writing a radically new religion for the modern world. While it has a number of features that set it radically apart from other teachings, I still consider it to be a transitional religion.

Its central point - the story of Xenu - is based on a fusion between the Christian doctrine of the original, some Gnostic ideas and some basic Freudian psycho-analysis - presented in a science-fiction setting. It does not borrow any sacred texts from any existing religion - its written corpus is entirely new. I have personally find both decisions quite questionable - if there is one Christian doctrine that needs to be replaced - it is precisely the archaic idea of the original sin. In Islam - which dates from only a few hundred years later - and which is otherwise mostly derived from the same texts - this doctrine is already abolished. I also find the creation of a new corpus of legends absolutely unnecessary - besides the fact that these has been modernized to include science-fiction - these have little real value. One cannot simply invent legends out of nowhere - as their value is precisely the fact that these have been transmitted over the generations. The existing corpus of legends and moral stories is more than sufficient and updating them to a modern setting does not justify the loss of authenticity.

One of the most striking features of Scientology is that it is an initiatory religion - it contains a significant amount of forbidden knowledge that must be revealed. No major religion of this type has survived to modernity - although they used to be somewhat common in the Ancient World - the old pagan religions of the Greeks and the Romans were typical examples and so was Tengrism and some of the animalistic African and South American religions. All of the major organized religions were not initiatory. Judaism - which is the critical transition point between paganism and monotheism - had some of it - but by the time of the Second Temple it was rarely practiced. Christianity explicitly banned every form of forbidden knowledge - this formed the basis of what became the accusation of *witchcraft* during the Middle Ages. Forbidden knowledge is a very particular trait of a religion - it serves no immediate purpose besides protecting the interests of the priests' class. For all, it seems that served a financial purpose in Scientology - as its *priests* - called *auditors* - were actually getting paid on the basis of the possession of this hidden knowledge. It is another perfect example of its excessive reliance on money. One notable example to this rule is Freemasonry - in Freemasonry - where initiation rituals play a very important rule - this element serves to bring everyone together while creating an artificial barrier with the outside world. It is probably the only example of a correct use of forbidden knowledge and initiation rituals which is linked to its legacy as a secret society.

On the other hand, one of the strongest features of Scientology is its much more modern concept of afterlife. While studying the world religions, I remember being deeply impressed by Sikhism. Sikhism, despite being a major world religion, is largely unknown in the West because it remains limited to India - and its diaspora across the world.  It appeared quite late - during the High Middle Ages - and it is the only major religion that has adopted ideas both from the Abrahamic - mostly Islam - and the Eastern religions - mostly Hinduism. In Sikhism, the Abrahamic concept of a single God is merged with the Eastern concept of Samsara - as these are clearly the major strengths of each group of religions. For example, mysticism is typically a weak point in all Abrahamic religion and has always been source of controversy. As these are revelation religions - that is they are based upon the revelation of a divine knowledge - there is always the immediate problem of regulating who is allowed to interpret the divine revelations. Eastern religions do not suffer from this problem at all and have a much more natural definition of the afterlife and the irrational. Also, worth noting is the fact, that as these religions tend to be much less dogmatic and adhere to a more flexible world view, they have aged much better than the Abrahamic religions in which the archaic afterlife plays a central role. In Eastern religions, the divine cannot be applied to the worldly - there are no prophets, messiahs or miracles. Their founders are sages. This is clearly one of the most important innovations of Scientology - and one that Scientology clearly does not use up to its full potential - since it remains partially based on revelation.

Another striking feature of Scientology is its extreme hostility to modern psychiatry. This is typical of most modern sects that have been created in our modern age. Obviously, just like astrophysics, psychiatry occupies a field that was traditionally reserved to religion. As these concepts are critical to any religion - whose main goal is to present a coherent world view - the overlap with those two fields cannot be avoided. Modern psychiatry, despite the fact that it is a very difficult science - remains a science that is the product of a very laborious and rigorous studies and cannot simply be brushed aside. Any serious attempt of creating a new religion must take it into account. Wherever there is overlap, it must be perfect. All circles must perfectly fall on existing circles and all crosses must perfectly fall on existing crosses. These two fields - the cosmology and the inner workings of the human brain - must embed perfectly into our verifiable knowledge. This is something that Scientology completely fails to achieve.

All in all, Scientology remains a very interesting example of a transitional religion that will surely be remembered as one of the first signs of the new world.
