# Where Did the Soviet Union go Wrong?

When asked this question, most people will immediately answer that their economic system was doomed from that start. While this is mostly true, the reasons behind the failure of this first attempt at a modern *designer* society were much more complex.

First, it should be noted that while their society was generally known as a *communist* society - partly because the ruling party was named the [*Communist Party of the Soviet Union*](https://https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communist_Party_of_the_Soviet_Union) - they themselves never used this term and their ideology had a number of very significant differences compared to the earlier communist philosophy that appeared in Germany and France during the 19th century. In fact, they called themselves socialists, and they referred to the earlier communist philosophy as *Early Communism* distinguishing it from their own *Developed Communism*, emphasizing the fact there were a number of key differences between the two.

One of the key ideological differences between the communist theories of the 19th century and those that were actually applied in the Eastern Bloc during the Soviet era was the total acceptance of the fact that some form of social inequality was actually beneficial. This ideological tenet is very frequently misunderstood, as the original early Marxism did call for total social equality. In the Eastern Bloc, the official doctrine on social inequality was that it was a necessary evil.

One of the most striking features of this ideology, is that it did not eliminate competition. Competition was still recognized a basic element of any human society. In fact, it did encouraged fierce competition - for as long as this competition remained at a personal level - between individuals. It was only competition on the organizational level that was deemed counter-productive and inefficient. What this means in practice, is that you were still competing when it came to making the best shoes with the guy next to you. You were still getting rewarded - both materially and socially. On the other hand, competition between different companies making shoes was considered inefficient and wasteful. It was assumed that advances in control theory allowed for a vastly superior planning of industrial capacity - by estimating future needs - than the classical boom-bust cycle of free market economies. It was an idea that was not part of the original theories of the 19th century - it appeared during the early 20th century.

And it is precisely this ideological tenet that had absolutely disastrous long term consequences. It did not take into account something that I would like to call *Organizational Decay*.

Nowhere this is more obvious, than in the current IT sector where despite the first signs of a slow down, innovation still plays a tremendous role. It is a sector where a huge international company can grow out of literally thin air in less than a decade - because there is something they learned to do much better than everyone else. And once they have reached a certain critical size, then their capacity for innovation inevitably disappears. From this moment on, they start *decaying*.

While in the fast paced world of IT, this usually takes about two decades - in the Eastern Bloc, it took about twice this time. Without external competition, every single form of industrial organization started decaying. Without external pressure for efficiency, nepotism became so rampant, that it became a system within the system. If you trace the economic output of all the so-called *communist* countries - you will always see the same pattern - an initial period of enthusiasm and growth - that lasts ten to twenty years - then an inevitable slow decay that only gets worse as time progresses.

And nowhere was this form of *decay* with more consequences than in the ruling parties themselves. Once all forms of external competition were eliminated, the only competition that remained was the one among the party officials. There is a famous principle called the [*Peter principle*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_principle) which states that everyone gets promoted to his level of incompetence. In any organization, invariably, incompetent people always, sooner or later, get promoted to a position of power. Without any form of external pressure and competition, they tend to remain there forever. With their power guaranteed by the law, the communist parties throughout the Eastern Bloc slowly devolved into static gerontacracies. In most of the countries in Eastern Europe - not counting the Soviet Union where this experiment did last a little bit longer - the generation that came to power in 1945 was the same generation that was still in power in 1989.

This is how the Soviet Union collapsed, and this is how most big tech companies inevitable decline.

Gorbachev himself used to tell this story about how he took the decision to reform the system during a long meeting of the Politburo during which they couldn't agree on the action to take to resolve the supply problem of women's pantyhose. On paper, the USSR had as much factories and production per capita as every other country - yet there was a constant supply problem. No one on the Politburo - all of its members being men in their 70s or even 80s - had any idea of what was wrong with this market.

"Imagine a country that flies into space, launches Sputniks, creates such a defense system, and it can’t resolve the problem of women's pantyhose... It was incredible and humiliating to work in such a government."—Mikhail Gorbachev 
